---
title: Share objects
description: Share objects between tenants
---

- Tracking Issue: https://github.com/datafuselabs/databend/issues/6973

## Summary

Describes creating and managing shares for tenants, and sharing shares with other tenants. A `tenant` identifier uniquely identifies an account within your organization.

The following database objects can be shared:

- Tables
- Views
- UDFs

All database objects shared between tenants are `read-only`, this means that the share objects can not be modified or deleted.

## DDL for Shares

To support creating and managing shares, Databend provides the following set of special DDL commands:

- Create Share
- Drop Share
- Alter Share
- Grant share object privilege TO Share
- Revoke shared object privilege FROM Share
- Show Share
- Describe Share
- Show Grants
- Create Database, Table FROM Share

### Create Share

Create an empty new share. Once the share is created, the user can use the `GRANT <privilege> ... TO SHARE` command to include a database and objects in the database (tables) in the share. Users can then use `ALTER SHARE` to add one or more tenants to that share.

Syntax:

```sql
CREATE SHARE [IF NOT EXISTS] <share_name> [ COMMENT = '<string_literal>' ]
```

### Drop Share

Remove the specified share from the system and immediately revoke access to all tenants (i.e., the tenants that created the database from that share).

Syntax:

```sql
DROP SHARE [IF EXISTS] <share_name>
```

### Alter Share

Modify the properties of an existing share.

- Add or remove tenants from the tenant list.

Syntax:

```sql
ALTER SHARE [IF EXISTS] <share_name> {ADD | REMOVE} TENANTS = <tenant_name> [, <tenant_name>, ...]
```

### Grant share object privilege TO SHARE

Grant access to the database and other supported database objects (tables, views, etc.) to a share. Granting permissions to these objects effectively adds them to the share, which can then be shared with one or more tenants.

Syntax:

```sql
GRANT object_privilege ON grant_share_object_name TO SHARE <share_name>

object_privilege ::= [
-- For DATABASE, SCHEMA, or FUNCTION
    USAGE |
-- For TABLE or VIEW
    SELECT |
-- For DATABASE
    REFERENCE_USAGE]

grant_share_object_name := { DATABASE <db_name> | TABLE <db_name>.<table_name> }
```

### Revoke share object privilege FROM SHARE

Revoke access to databases and other supported database objects (tables, views, etc.) in the share. Revoking permissions to these objects effectively removes them from the share, making them inaccessible to all tenants that have created databases in the share.

Syntax:

```sql
REVOKE object_privilege ON grant_share_object_name FROM SHARE <share_name>

object_privilege := [USAGE|SELECT|REFERENCE_USAGE]

grant_share_object_name := { DATABASE <db_name> | TABLE <db_name>.<table_name> }
```

### Show Share

Show all shares that have been created by your tenant or are available to consume by your tenant.



Syntax:

```sql
SHOW SHARES;
```



Output:

The output of `SHOW SHARES` command is a list of share objects information, with columns `created_on`, `kind`, `name`,`database_name`, `to`, `from`, and `comment`.

If the share is created by your tenant, then `kind` is `OUTBOUND`, and `from` is empty; otherwise, if the share is available to consume by your tenant, then `kind` is `INBOUND` and `to` is empty.

### Describe Share

Describes the share objects that are included in a share.

Syntax:

```sql
{DESC|DESCRIBE} SHARE [<tenant_name>.]<share_name>
```

If `<tenant_name>` is ignored, then the current tenant name will be used.



Output:

The output of `DESCRIBE SHARE` command is a list of share objects information, with columns `kind`, `name`,`shared_on`, for example:

```sql
+----------+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| kind     | name                                 | shared_on                     |
|----------+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------|
| DATABASE | tenant1.db1                          | 2022-08-11 18:04:17.642 -0700 |
| TABLE    | tenant1.db1.table1 								  | 2022-08-11 18:04:17.749 -0700 |
+----------+--------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
```

Note that each share object's `name` prefix with the `<tenant_name>.`.

### Show Grants

Lists all access control privileges that have been explicitly granted to tenants and shares.

Syntax:

```sql
SHOW GRANTS ON grant_share_object_name
SHOW GRANTS TO SHARE <share_name>
SHOW GRANTS OF SHARE <share_name>

grant_share_object_name := { DATABASE <db_name> | TABLE <db_name>.<table_name> }
```

- `SHOW GRANTS ON grant_share_object_name`: Lists all privileges that have been granted on the object.
- `SHOW GRANTS TO SHARE <share_name>`： Lists all the privileges granted to the share.
- `SHOW GRANTS OF SHARE <share_name>`: Lists all the tenants for the share and indicates the tenants that are using the share.

### Create Database, Table FROM Share

After tenants have permission to access the share objects, can create the database from the share.

Syntax:

```sql
CREATE DATABASE <name> FROM SHARE <provider_tenant>.<share_name>
```

## Example of Using Share with SQL

To create a share using SQL:

1. Use the `CREATE SHARE` command to create an empty share.
2. Use the `GRANT <privilege> … TO SHARE` command to add a database to the share and then selectively grant access to specific database objects (tables) to the share.
3. Use the `ALTER SHARE` command to add one or more accounts access to the share.
4. Use the `CREATE DATABASE ... FROM SHARE` command to create a database from the share.

### Step1: Create an Empty Share

The following example creates an empty share named t:

```sql
create share t;
```

### Step 2: Grant Privileges for a Database and Objects to the Share

To include objects in a share, grant permissions to each object. When granting permissions, first grant usage rights to any container objects before granting usage rights to the objects in the container. For example, grant access to the database before granting access to any table included in the database.

The following example illustrates granting privileges on the following objects to the t share created in the previous step:

```sql
grant usage on database db1 to share t;

grant select on table db1.table1 to share t;
```

After granting the object privileges operations, can add tenants to the share.

### Step 3: Add Tenants to the Share

The following example adds two tenants to the t share:

```sql
alter share t add tenants=x, y;
```

After altering share add tenants, now tenants x and y have the permissions to create objects(database, tables) using the sharing object.

### Step 4: Create a Database from the Share

Now tenant x creates database db from the share t:

```
CREATE DATABASE db FROM SHARE t
```
