---
title: Config Backward Compatibility
description: RFC for backward config compatibility
---

- RFC PR: [datafuselabs/databend#5324](https://github.com/datafuselabs/databend/pull/5324)
- Tracking Issue: [datafuselabs/databend#5297](https://github.com/datafuselabs/databend/issues/5297)

# Summary

The versioned configuration will allow us to iterate quickly while avoiding breaking the environment.

# Motivation

While early birds are starting to deploy databend by themselves, it's time for us to establish some contracts between users. We should allow users to upgrade their deployments without breaking backward compatibility. In this RFC, we will focus on `config`.

`config` I mentioned here including:

- config file that is read by `databend-query` and `databend-meta`.
- config env that read by `databend-query` and `databend-meta`
- application args that are accepted by `databend-query` and `databend-meta`
- protobuf messaged that generated by `databend-query` (stored inside `databend-meta`)

Out of scope:

- Tools like `fuzz` and `metactl` are not covered by this RFC.
- Command-line UX of `databend-query` and `databend-meta` is another topic. We will not cover it in this RFC.
- Config input/output by SQL/HTTP Rest API are not covered (for example, the output of table `system.config`)

> For convenience, I will use `databend` to refer to `databend-query` and `databend-meta`.

With this RFC, our users will upgrade their deployments without breaking. Old configs should always work along with the new implementations.

# Guide-level explanation

No action is needed for users to take while upgrading their deployments. They upgrade databend by replacing binaries and images directly.

Sometimes, they will get `DEPRECATED` warnings for some config fields. It's up to users to decide whether to migrate them. Before we introduce the versioned config formally, no config will be removed. And all config fields will work as before.

# Reference-level explanation

Inside databend, we will split config into `inner` and `outer`:

**`inner`**

Config instances used inside databend. All logic **SHOULD** be implemented towards the `inner` config.

**`outer`**

Config instances are used as the front office of the databend. They will have different versions and transform into an `inner` config. Other modules **SHOULD NOT** depend on `outer` config.

Take `query` for example:

The inner config of the query will be like this:

```rust
#[derive(Clone, Default, Debug, PartialEq, Serialize, Deserialize)]
#[serde(default)]
pub struct Config {
    pub query: QueryConfig,
    pub log: LogConfig,
    pub meta: MetaConfig,
    pub storage: StorageConfig,
    pub catalog: HiveCatalogConfig,
}
```

The outer config of the query will be like this:

```rust
#[derive(Clone, Default, Debug, PartialEq, Serialize, Deserialize, Parser)]
#[clap(about, version, author)]
#[serde(default)]
pub struct ConfigV0 {
    #[clap(long, short = 'c', default_value_t)]
    pub config_file: String,
    #[clap(long="config-version", default_value_t)]
    pub config_version: u64,

    #[clap(flatten)]
    pub query: QueryConfigV1,

    #[clap(flatten)]
    pub log: LogConfigV1,

    #[clap(flatten)]
    pub meta: MetaConfigV1,

    #[clap(flatten)]
    pub storage: StorageConfigV1,
    
    #[clap(flatten)]
    pub catalog: HiveCatalogConfigV1,
}
```

The `inner` config users have to maintain the `outer` config.

For example: `common-io` should provide `inner` config `StorageConfig`. If `query` wants to include `StorageConfig` inside `QueryConfig`, `query` needs to:

- Implement versioned `outer` config for `StorageConfig` called `v0::StorageConfig`.
- Implement `Into<StorageConfig> for v0::StorageConfigV1`.
- Refer `StorageConfig` in `QueryConfig`,
- Refer `v0::StorageConfig` and `v0::QueryConfig`.

## Config Maintenance

All maintenance notices **SHOULD** be applied to the `outer` config struct.

- Add config: add with new default is compatible, or it's forbidden.
- Remove config: remove field is not allowed. Mark them as `DEPRECATED` instead.
- Change config: change config type and structure are not allowed.

# Drawbacks

## Maintenance burden

Introducing an `outer` config will increase the complexity of the config handler.

# Rationale and alternatives

## Why not use `serde` and related tools?

The most important thing is that RFC intends to split `inner` and `outer` config instances. Make `inner` as simple as possible and leave the userland interactive works for `outer` to handle.

`serde` doesn't work in this way.

## How to work with protobuf used by `meta`?

As described in the reference, the config used by `protobuf` is another `outer` config. It should handle versions by itself. Based on the current status of databend `common-proto-conv`, we will keep all fields until we decide to increase `OLDEST_COMPATIBLE_VER`.

# Prior art

None, this RFC is the first try for backward config compatibility.

# Unresolved questions

None.

# Future possibilities

## Introduce versioned config

We can introduce a versioned config to allow users to specify the config versions:

- config file: `version=42`
- config env: `export CONFIG_VERSION=42`
- args: `--config-version=42`

Suppose compatible changes happened as a new config entry was added. databend will make sure that the entry has a default value.

Suppose incompatible changes happened, like config been removed/renamed/changed. databend increases the config version. The older version will still load by the specified version and be converted to the latest config internally. A `DEPRECATED` warning will also be printed for removed config fields. So users can decide whether to migrate them.

## Load different versions from config files and envs

It's possible to load different versions from config files and envs.

For example:

Old version from config files:

```toml
version = 23

a = "Version 23"
```

New version from env:

```shell
export CONFIG_VERSION=42
export QUERY_B = "Version 42"
```

For the best situation, we can load from env via version 42 and then load from config via version 23.
